[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other night.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed I was at a party and I was surrounded by rich industrialists.
[Amit Varma]: They were dressed in the finest clothes, drinking the best alcohol, talking in fancy accents
[Amit Varma]: and doing mua mua mua to people around them as they distributed air kisses like government
[Amit Varma]: loans.
[Amit Varma]: I went to the bar to get a cocktail for myself and bumped into a man there who was bare chested
[Amit Varma]: and wore just a dirty dhoti.
[Amit Varma]: It was Vijay Mallya.
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Mallya, I said surprised, what are you doing back in India?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, hi Amit, he said, call me Vijay.
[Amit Varma]: It's so good to finally meet you.
[Amit Varma]: I really love your podcast, The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I used to be unseen and now I am seen again.
[Amit Varma]: Arre bro, answer my question, I said.
[Amit Varma]: How did you come back to India?
[Amit Varma]: I thought you defaulted on your loans.
[Amit Varma]: I thought you were on the run, Mr. Mallya said.
[Amit Varma]: I was.
[Amit Varma]: Now I am not.
[Amit Varma]: I simply got myself declared as a farmer and then my loans were waived, muhahahahaha, muhahahaha.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Unknown]: Your weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is on a chronic disease that is once again sweeping through India like
[Amit Varma]: an epidemic, farm loan waivers.
[Amit Varma]: My first guest today is Vivek Kaul, a columnist for Equity Master who has written the Easy
[Amit Varma]: Money Trilogy.
[Amit Varma]: Do check out his fine book, India's Big Government, which is on Amazon right now.
[Amit Varma]: My second guest is Kumar Anand, an economist based in Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek and Kumar, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Kumar, I remember you once told me a fascinating story about your dad who works in a bank.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell us about it again?
[Guest 1]: My dad is retired now, but yeah, the story goes back in 2008.
[Guest 1]: So early 2008, this was just before Manmohan Singh government announced a farm loan waiver
[Guest 1]: of about 60,000 crore, if I'm not mistaken.
[Guest 1]: So my father, he was a bank manager for a regional rural bank in a small town in Bihar
[Guest 1]: and as part of his day-to-day job, he has given and disbursed a lot of loans.
[Guest 1]: And one particular kind of loan was something under which is disbursed to farmers called
[Guest 1]: Kisan Credit Cards.
[Guest 1]: So this is a small sum of money which is given to farmers to meet their daily production,
[Guest 1]: you know, expenses.
[Guest 1]: So it was a small sum of money for 50,000 rupees.
[Guest 1]: So this guy who the money was given to, he comes to my father with 40,000 rupees with
[Guest 1]: the intention of returning as a lump sum payment back to the bank and says that before depositing
[Guest 1]: the money, he says to my dad that, sir, I have been listening to the stories, a lot
[Guest 1]: of murmurs and chatter that there is going to be a farm loan waiver, you know, politicians
[Guest 1]: are talking about it, probably something is going to come.
[Guest 1]: And then my father convinces him that, you know, why you should still deposit because
[Guest 1]: it was the job of my father to convince him and so that, you know, the banks continue
[Guest 1]: to do good business.
[Guest 1]: And overall, basically, he agrees and he deposits the money.
[Guest 1]: And just about a few days later, Manmohan Singh government comes and announces the farm
[Guest 1]: loan waiver.
[Guest 1]: So a few days later, he comes back to see my dad in the bank and says, sir, my neighbor
[Guest 1]: who has taken the loan with no intention of returning the money is now going to get the
[Guest 1]: entire, you know, his loan waived off, while just because I made the mistake of being an
[Guest 1]: honest borrower and paying back on time, I am stuck with getting no relief.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially what the farm loan waiver did was that farm loan waivers incentivize the
[Amit Varma]: dishonest people who don't mean to return and it punishes the honest people who are
[Amit Varma]: actually making an effort to return the money on time.
[Amit Varma]: And economists, of course, as you know, call this a moral hazard.
[Amit Varma]: The same principle, for example, applies to the bailouts of banks, big banks too big to
[Amit Varma]: fail that happened after the 2008 crisis, that if you know you're going to get bailed
[Amit Varma]: out, if you know you're going to get a waiver, then you don't have to behave responsibly
[Amit Varma]: because the consequences of that are not what they otherwise would be.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, underlying there are different issues in case of bankers getting bailed out.
[Guest 1]: They knew it was they are too big to fail.
[Guest 1]: So definitely the politicians will come and bail them out, or at least this euphoria is
[Guest 1]: being created that we are too big to fail, so we have to bail them out.
[Guest 1]: In the case of farmers, it is that, you know, there's a big chunk of votes to be gained
[Amit Varma]: from there.
[Amit Varma]: So and so and we'd written a piece on this for all the listeners.
[Amit Varma]: If you just go over to Pragati at thinkpragati.com, Kumar and I wrote a piece about the Joint
[Amit Varma]: League, which essentially had the headline politics is equal to bribery, which we believe
[Amit Varma]: almost all politics is.
[Amit Varma]: It amounts to a redistribution of wealth from common voters to either specific interest
[Amit Varma]: groups who fund the parties or to specific vote banks.
[Amit Varma]: This is farm loan waivers, of course, a very overt case of this kind of redistribution
[Amit Varma]: because the money doesn't come from nowhere.
[Amit Varma]: And farmers, of course, are a valuable vote bank.
[Amit Varma]: And you can support this with the rhetoric of, oh, you know, the farmers are the backbone
[Amit Varma]: of our country and they need our support and they are suffering and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Where the point here to be noted is that in the long run, this doesn't really help the
[Amit Varma]: farmers either.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Just to complete the story, what stood out for me in the episode with my father and the
[Guest 1]: loanee was my father was very disheartened because in future, anyone who he gives out
[Guest 1]: loan to, it will be very hard for him to say, you know, that you should come and return
[Guest 1]: back your loan on time.
[Amit Varma]: Because he knows that the rational course of action for the other guy is to not return
[Guest 1]: his loan.
[Guest 1]: That is the system we've created.
[Amit Varma]: That is the incentive that we have put in place.
[Amit Varma]: And in a manner of speaking, the guy who returned the loan subsidized the guy who didn't return
[Guest 2]: the loan.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Can I just butt in here?
[Guest 2]: Sure.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, you know, the various state governments have been waiving off farm loans
[Guest 2]: over the past few weeks.
[Guest 2]: So the government of Maharashtra has waived off farm loans and what they've done is they've
[Guest 2]: also provided an incentive of rupees 25,000 to people who haven't, you know, defaulted
[Guest 2]: on their farm loan.
[Guest 2]: So this is like, you know, rubbing salt on their wounds.
[Guest 2]: And how much are the people who actually?
[Guest 2]: I think that number is around one and a half lakh.
[Guest 2]: So essentially, anybody who's defaulted gets a benefit, you know, of six times, you know,
[Guest 2]: more than someone who's not defaulted.
[Guest 2]: So anyone who's not defaulted ends up looking very, very stupid.
[Guest 2]: And the next time, you know, it's more or less sure that he's going to default.
[Amit Varma]: Which is crazy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and farm loan waivers just perpetuate this nonsense, because then you have this
[Amit Varma]: whole cycle playing out all over again for the next election season.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, Vivek, since, you know, we can all be agreed that farm loan waivers
[Amit Varma]: are not a solution at all.
[Amit Varma]: What are the problems that ail our agriculture?
[Amit Varma]: Like why are like our farmers' grievances are genuine?
[Amit Varma]: There is a serious agricultural crisis in this country.
[Amit Varma]: Why is that crisis there?
[Amit Varma]: And while, you know, it's just too deep and complex a problem, what are some of the possible
[Amit Varma]: directions in which the solutions lie?
[Guest 2]: Okay, I mean, that's a topic for a book, but I'll just try summarizing a few points here.
[Guest 2]: So one of the things that has happened, you know, during the course of this year is that
[Guest 2]: farmers have ended up producing more of, you know, products like pulses, onions, etc.
[Guest 2]: Now, what has happened is that because of that, the prices have crashed.
[Guest 2]: Now, the government declares a minimum support price for 23 crops, but it buys only, primarily
[Guest 2]: buys only two crops at the MSP, rice and wheat.
[Guest 2]: It has also started buying pulses over the last couple of years.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, during the course of the last financial year, only around 5% of pulses were
[Guest 2]: bought at the MSP.
[Guest 2]: So what has happened because of that is that, you know, farmers have not been able to sell
[Guest 2]: their pulses even at the MSP.
[Guest 2]: So prices have gone below the MSP.
[Guest 2]: Why did they grow so many pulses?
[Guest 2]: Because what has happened is one is, you know, they look at the past prices where in, you
[Guest 2]: know, over the last two years, dal prices have gone through the roof, and in particular
[Guest 2]: urad dal, no, in particular, toor dal, not urad.
[Guest 2]: So toor dal prices crossed 200 rupees per kg.
[Guest 2]: And because of that, the production went up by close to 80% this year.
[Guest 2]: Now, the problem is that, you know, there is no buying mechanism in place as far as
[Guest 2]: the government and the MSP pricing is concerned.
[Guest 2]: So the prices have crashed, particularly in Maharashtra, where a lot of toor dal is grown.
[Guest 2]: And so farmers are protesting, at least in Maharashtra, because of, you know, dal prices,
[Guest 2]: they're also protesting because onion prices have crashed this year.
[Guest 2]: So we don't have, you know, a good storage mechanism in place.
[Guest 2]: So that's one major reason why there is an agriculture crisis.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if I may just interject that kind of what your story reminds me is of my good
[Amit Varma]: friend Mohit Satyanand, who's also been a guest on the show, once told me that, because
[Amit Varma]: of MSPs being introduced in the late 1960s, one of the unseen effects of that was because
[Amit Varma]: the MSPs were for certain kinds of crop, I forget which ones now, but certain crops and
[Guest 2]: food grains.
[Guest 2]: It started with wheat, and then rice and wheat.
[Guest 2]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: And because of the MSPs, because of the security that farmers felt that, oh, iska toh MSP hai,
[Amit Varma]: ye toh milega hai, ye toh minimum support price.
[Amit Varma]: They put their energies into growing those, instead of things like pulses and so on, which
[Amit Varma]: led to massive protein deficiencies in India, especially, you know, the poorer you go, the
[Amit Varma]: greater the protein deficiency, which was and what you're now saying is very interesting
[Amit Varma]: that now, you know, that again happened because the government did not allow the market mechanism
[Amit Varma]: and people's actual demand to express itself and guide the supply.
[Amit Varma]: And even if it's now swinging in the other direction, where farmers are screwed, because
[Amit Varma]: they've made too many pulses and whatever, again, this overproduction is partly because
[Amit Varma]: of government not allowing those market signals to accurately reach the farmers.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a broader problem that goes beyond just setting the MSPs, it goes into, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the entire trading mechanism being controlled, farmers aren't allowed to just sell the crops
[Guest 2]: as they want.
[Guest 2]: Basically, you know, as far as the agriculture market in India is concerned, the market mechanism
[Guest 2]: doesn't really work now, which is true about pulses as well.
[Guest 2]: Now, what has happened is this year, there has been an overproduction, which has led
[Guest 2]: to a crash in prices.
[Guest 2]: Next year, the production will fall and the prices will rise again, will go up.
[Guest 2]: The other thing that new needs point that needs to be made here is in the case of pulses
[Guest 2]: is that, you know, this year, the production of pulses has grown by around 37%.
[Guest 2]: And you know, we produced around 22.4 million tons of pulses in total, which is the highest
[Guest 2]: ever production that has happened.
[Guest 2]: Now, this is this should have been good news.
[Guest 2]: But one reason why it's turned out to be a bad news is because, you know, export of pulses
[Guest 2]: is banned, whereas imports are allowed.
[Guest 2]: So you know, in a year when the maximum production of pulses has happened, the maximum import
[Guest 2]: of pulses has also happened, which is crazy, which is sort of crazy.
[Guest 2]: So you know, these are the ways why, you know, through which you do not allow the market
[Amit Varma]: mechanism.
[Amit Varma]: In the case in the trend to understand the specific crisis, two questions one in the
[Amit Varma]: case of pulses and onions, is it partly because the government wanted to give this rhetoric
[Amit Varma]: of oh, we have brought the prices down because the prices of onions were an election issue
[Amit Varma]: once upon a time, and they overreached without understanding the unseen effect.
[Guest 2]: So in case of pulses, you know, you can surely say that, given the fact that, you know, imports
[Guest 2]: continue to be allowed, while exports are not allowed, I mean, it seems I mean, you
[Guest 2]: can say that the conspiracy theory is that the government essentially wanted to sort
[Guest 2]: of, you know, ensure that prices of pulses crash.
[Guest 2]: In case of onions, the story is a little more, you know, interesting.
[Guest 2]: So the one of the biggest onion markets in India is in Rasalgaon near Nashik.
[Guest 2]: And I looked at data for the month of January.
[Guest 2]: And if you looked at, you know, compared data between 2017 and 2016, for the month of January,
[Guest 2]: the supply of onions coming to the market increased by around 22%, whereas the prices
[Guest 2]: crashed by close to 46%.
[Guest 2]: Now, one reason for that is, is the fact that, you know, demonetization sucked out a lot
[Guest 2]: of working capital out of agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: That was going to be my second question.
[Guest 2]: Yes, so demonetization has had, you know, interestingly, demonetization did not have
[Guest 2]: an impact on agriculture production.
[Guest 2]: You know, this year, the food grain production went up by close to 8%, and horticulture production
[Guest 2]: went up by 3%.
[Guest 2]: But it has had an impact on the prices that farmers are getting for their produce, because
[Guest 2]: the working capital was sucked out, out of agriculture markets, and that still hasn't
[Guest 2]: been replaced.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, besides this, like I've heard previous episodes of The Seen and The Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: which you know, listeners can browse at seenunseen.in talking about agricultural issues, and the
[Amit Varma]: fact of the matter is that farmers aren't allowed to sell their agricultural land for
[Amit Varma]: non agricultural purposes, you aren't allowed to set up corporations that do farming.
[Amit Varma]: So farmers are essentially not just forced to be farmers, they're also forced to be entrepreneurs
[Amit Varma]: and they're two completely separate skills.
[Amit Varma]: And farmers are therefore trapped in agriculture and farm loan waivers, which you know, is
[Amit Varma]: a subject of this episode, essentially just perpetuates that it's like, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: problems of agriculture go so deep and so far.
[Amit Varma]: And to just give a farm loan waiver to farmers is essentially like applying an ice pack to
[Amit Varma]: the head of someone who's had persistent fever, doing nothing at all to address the underlying
[Guest 2]: causes.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are too many underlying causes which go unaddressed, I mean, right to the
[Guest 2]: fact that, you know, the plot sizes in agriculture have come down dramatically over the years.
[Guest 2]: And now, you know, in states like, you know, Bihar and Kerala, the plot sizes are too small
[Guest 2]: for, you know, any agriculture to be viable within that plot.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this is a great point you'd made in our episode where we spoke about jobs where
[Amit Varma]: you said that a lot of these agitations, partidars in Gujarat, Jats in Haryana, are coming from
[Amit Varma]: landowning class, because the land holdings over the years have been divided so much and
[Amit Varma]: gotten, you know, so small.
[Amit Varma]: And next week, we're going to have an episode where I talk with Shruti Rajagopalan about
[Amit Varma]: the right to the right to property, how it's happened over the years.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the points she makes is that because of these laws around not being able to sell
[Amit Varma]: agricultural land for non agricultural purposes, you've essentially destroyed the value of
[Amit Varma]: that land.
[Amit Varma]: If not completely dead capital, it's become really close to it, I'd call it comatose capital.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also hit farmers hard, there is just simply no exit for them.
[Guest 1]: I have just a question to add, and probably both of you can take a shot at it.
[Guest 1]: Is there an agriculture market, so to speak, you know, is there a market at all?
[Guest 1]: So for example, if you look at all the ingredients, you know, electricity is not provided the
[Guest 1]: market price, there's heavily subsidized water, the same story, same stories with fertilizer.
[Guest 1]: And then of course, agricultural labor also has now with NREGA, the prices has been, you
[Guest 1]: know, kind of distorted.
[Guest 1]: So all the inputs if you look at, so whether it is labor, electricity, water, fertilizer,
[Guest 1]: the prices have been distorted.
[Guest 1]: On the output, now there is MSP at which the procurement happens, and APMC, which is now
[Guest 1]: slowly and gradually probably some sort of reforms are happening on that front.
[Guest 1]: But even then there is sort of monopsony.
[Guest 1]: So there is a single buyer to some extent.
[Guest 1]: So what that does, so I don't see a market agriculture market, so to speak, because both
[Guest 2]: on the buy side, on the sell side, it's all, it's a market, you know, in the not a market
[Guest 2]: in the conventional sense of the term.
[Amit Varma]: But yes, I mean, you know, the kind of market you have in Soviet Russia, I mean, some place
[Guest 1]: where they probably go sell.
[Guest 1]: So of course, then this huge misallocation of resources, also farmers running huge amount
[Guest 1]: of debts, or over production and under production of cycle happening is should not be a big
[Guest 1]: surprise for policy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, like I often say that India lives in the cake, I often often often say India
[Amit Varma]: lives in different centuries, you know, 1920 or 21st and you know, we are probably privileged
[Amit Varma]: enough to have most of our existence in the 21st.
[Amit Varma]: But farmers seem to be in the 19th and it can equally be therefore said that India lives
[Amit Varma]: under different systems.
[Amit Varma]: So while we think our daily existence seems to be reasonably capitalist, but as you just
[Amit Varma]: described this, there doesn't seem to be any element of the market that actually affects
[Amit Varma]: agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: Our agriculture is in such a mess for the same reasons that Soviet Russia collapsed
[Amit Varma]: and their economy was in such bad shape, because every element the state tries to control it.
[Amit Varma]: And as we now know, through the lessons of history, the state cannot do that.
[Guest 1]: Just to add to add to the point, I've done some background work on in economic history,
[Guest 1]: looking into the episodes, particularly post independence, and I've looked into the some
[Guest 1]: of the work by the great Sara Joshi, the late Sara Joshi, who led farmers revolution movements
[Guest 1]: around the country, starting with Maharashtra.
[Guest 1]: Recently, I think it was Ajit Ranade who wrote about him.
[Guest 1]: So it all started with the after independence, India wanted to focus on industries, to wanted
[Guest 1]: to promote industries.
[Guest 1]: Now that you want to do it, you want to depress the prices of agriculture produced so that
[Guest 1]: laborers could be, you know, could access them at a very cost effective manner.
[Guest 1]: So now to do that, you have to subsidize all those inputs.
[Guest 1]: So just we talked about, you know, whether fertilizer, electricity, water, all those
[Guest 1]: subsidies happen.
[Guest 1]: And when you're doing that, then you have to provide the right amount of price for the
[Guest 1]: output.
[Guest 1]: So for that, you started doing MSP.
[Guest 1]: So in some ways, it's a cascade of policies, you know, I mean, bad policy one after another,
[Guest 1]: and we have not been able to diagnose the problem.
[Guest 1]: And definitely, occasional farm loan waiver is not the solution.
[Guest 1]: It's someone has said, it's like, it's a PPP model the government is planning, you know,
[Guest 1]: working on.
[Amit Varma]: They don't actually plan poverty.
[Amit Varma]: Here's my question for you, Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: Since you've studied the finances of these farm loan waivers in some detail, the central
[Amit Varma]: government is now saying that look, all of these farm loan waivers are being done by
[Amit Varma]: the states, you know, the states will raise the finances for it, it doesn't affect us.
[Amit Varma]: Is that really true?
[Guest 2]: No, not really.
[Guest 2]: I mean, see, now, if you look at the state of Maharashtra, their original fiscal deficit
[Guest 2]: for this year was supposed to be around 37,289 crore with the farm loan waiver coming in,
[Guest 2]: it'll double.
[Guest 2]: Now, that money has to be raised from somewhere.
[Guest 2]: Now, one way is obviously you sort of raise some sort of taxes.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you tax petrol more, you know, you know, right now, in Mumbai, when you buy petrol,
[Guest 2]: you pay a drought charge.
[Guest 2]: So there is a per litre drought charge.
[Guest 2]: Now, you know, this year, as far as we understand, there has been no drought.
[Guest 2]: So why are we still paying a drought charge?
[Guest 2]: The other point is, obviously, most of these state governments, in fact, most of the money
[Guest 2]: which is waived off, will have to be borrowed, it will have to be borrowed because, you know,
[Guest 2]: banks cannot face these losses.
[Guest 2]: So the state governments will have to compensate these banks.
[Guest 2]: Now, when the state government borrows, you know, what it does is, it's the fiscal deficit
[Guest 2]: of the state government goes up, when the fiscal deficit of the state government goes
[Guest 2]: up, the fiscal deficit of the nation as a whole also goes up.
[Guest 2]: State governments are ultimately able to borrow because their debt is guaranteed by the central
[Guest 2]: government.
[Guest 2]: So in that sense, you know, ultimately, it's, you know, the debt of the central government
[Guest 2]: may not be going up, but the liability definitely is going up.
[Guest 2]: Also, one needs to, you know, realize the fact that there are only, you know, so much
[Guest 2]: savings going around, which can be borrowed.
[Guest 2]: And when the government borrows more, there is less for, you know, the private parties
[Guest 2]: to borrow.
[Guest 2]: Now, at this point of time, it may not matter much because the private parties are also
[Guest 2]: not borrowing much.
[Guest 2]: So the state governments will be able to borrow easily.
[Guest 2]: But let's say, you know, six months down the line or a year down the line, you know, once
[Guest 2]: the demonetization effects start to ebb, and the economy starts to grow again, and private
[Guest 2]: sector borrowing picks up, I mean, then we will definitely, you know, have an impact.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, you need to remember that we are still not done with all these wave offs.
[Guest 2]: You know, only four states have waived off loans up until now, now till 2019, many more
[Guest 2]: states are supposed to go to the polls.
[Guest 2]: And every time a state goes to, you know, polls, this will be the major issue.
[Guest 2]: I mean, even if, you know, the BJP does not raise it, the opposition party in that particular
[Guest 2]: state definitely will.
[Guest 2]: I mean, look at, you know, look at Karnataka, which is not really a BJP state right now,
[Guest 2]: it's governed by the Congress, they have already, you know, waived off farm loans worth around
[Guest 1]: 8000-9000 crores.
[Amit Varma]: If I'm not wrong, the agitation was started by the BJP.
[Guest 2]: So regardless, I mean, such populist policies really cut across parties.
[Guest 2]: It's easy, you know, all you have to do is just decide, I mean, there is no, I mean,
[Guest 2]: you know that, you know, you will be able to borrow because the central government is
[Amit Varma]: backing you.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, you know, it's competitive populism.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that drives it is that, you know, in the popular narrative, you can
[Amit Varma]: easily have people asking you that, bhaiya ki jab corporate itne NPAs hai, if you can
[Amit Varma]: give 5000 crore to say Ambani, I'm just picking a figure off the top of my head, then why
[Amit Varma]: not these poor farmers, they are suffering after all.
[Guest 2]: What do you feel about that logic?
[Guest 2]: I mean, I mean, it's, I mean, the logic doesn't make any sense.
[Guest 2]: I mean, at the end of the day, you know, you're basically distorting the credit culture.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the moment, you know, all these big industrialists are helped through, you know,
[Guest 2]: write offs, I mean, waive off is not the right word there.
[Guest 2]: They also understand that, you know, next time when they go to borrow, the government
[Guest 2]: will ultimately come to their, not the government, but the bank will ultimately come to their
[Guest 2]: rescue because they're too big to fail.
[Guest 2]: I mean, at the same level, it's, you know, when you sort of waive off farm loans, you
[Guest 2]: end up spoiling the credit culture.
[Guest 2]: I mean, as Kumar's father's story sort of, you know, explained, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, my reply to the whataboutery always is that, you know, both are wrong.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we're not saying that you should waive off corporate loans, you should, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we have an NPA problem, which we will discuss in a future episode, but you have
[Amit Varma]: to bring those guys to book, but A, not only are both wrong, but B, farm loan waivers don't
[Amit Varma]: even help farmers.
[Guest 2]: No, they don't.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, and the funny thing is, there are, there are solutions.
[Guest 2]: It's just that, you know, nobody sort of has even bothered to look at them in a serious
[Guest 2]: way.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, look at the fact that you have all these retail chains coming up.
[Guest 2]: Now, why shouldn't they be allowed to deal directly with farmers or if not farmers, at
[Guest 2]: least with farmer cooperatives?
[Guest 2]: I mean, that is a solution which brings the farmer closer to the end consumer.
[Guest 2]: And it wouldn't be a monopsony then as, you know, Kumar pointed out.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, recently I came across a great story.
[Guest 2]: So for a period of around six months, you know, there has been a farmer's market which
[Guest 2]: happens every Friday close to where I live.
[Guest 2]: And these guys, you know, drive down with their vegetables from as far as, you know,
[Guest 2]: Satara and Pune and Nashik.
[Guest 2]: And these vegetables are very fresh.
[Guest 2]: And normally what happens is the vegetables you get in the normal market are chemically
[Guest 2]: aged.
[Guest 2]: That doesn't happen there.
[Guest 2]: And these farmers are very, you know, they're happy to drive down five hours to sell their
[Guest 2]: stuff because they get a good price for what they produce.
[Guest 2]: So you know, I spoke to some of them and the point that came out was that for the first
[Guest 2]: time they have been able to set a price for what they are producing now, which was a great
[Guest 2]: thing for them.
[Guest 2]: But then this is really not a solution because, you know, driving down five hours every week
[Guest 2]: and you cannot move a lot of green vegetables because by the time they sort of land up in
[Guest 2]: Bombay, they've already gone bad.
[Guest 2]: So ultimately, you know, the solution is to bring the farmer closer to the consumer.
[Guest 2]: And this has to happen in various ways.
[Amit Varma]: Let me just clarify something for my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: We've been using the term monopsony and so what monopsony basically means is just as
[Amit Varma]: in a monopoly, there is only one seller.
[Amit Varma]: In a monopsony, there is only one buyer.
[Amit Varma]: So the thing with agriculture here today is there's no free market when it comes to the
[Amit Varma]: farmer selling his produce.
[Amit Varma]: You can't just go anywhere and set up shop and to any market or give your goods to any
[Amit Varma]: supplier.
[Amit Varma]: It's all government controlled, it's all area control.
[Amit Varma]: You can only sell at a specific place to a specific whatever and as you were just pointing
[Amit Varma]: out Vivek, the Maharashtra government, you know, loosened that up a little bit.
[Guest 2]: Last year, they loosened it and this is a very good impact of that.
[Guest 2]: But having said that, again, you know, a farmer, you know, growing stuff in Nasik shouldn't
[Amit Varma]: have to come all the way to Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: And one interesting story again, which you, you know, told me when we were having coffee
[Amit Varma]: last was about how the big box retailers like Reliance and so on have actually tried to
[Amit Varma]: go to the farmers and buy produce directly from them.
[Amit Varma]: But each of these territories are covered by each of these sort of local government
[Amit Varma]: markets are sort of controlled by different political parties.
[Guest 2]: So it becomes very difficult.
[Amit Varma]: It becomes simply very difficult in the same nonsense.
[Guest 1]: So the reason that farmer has to drive from six hours from Nasik to, you know, a market
[Guest 1]: in Prabhadevi.
[Guest 1]: So it's that that reason does not exist because of, you know, they are irrational, so to say,
[Unknown]: they want to drive down.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's just because you haven't allowed the market, you know, there's no choice for
[Guest 1]: them but to drive down, you know, if they want to get a better price.
[Guest 1]: In fact, you know, they will drive down to Ahmedabad if someone is buying at a good price.
[Guest 2]: And you know, the funny thing is, so I also happened to ask them as to whether they are
[Guest 2]: able to sell all their produce through these markets.
[Guest 2]: And they said no, I mean, you know, only a very small part of the produce is sold, you
[Guest 2]: know, through these farmers markets and they have to ultimately go back to the, you know,
[Guest 2]: the agent who deals with the APMC.
[Guest 2]: So it's not, you know, I mean, this is a solution at a very, very small level.
[Guest 2]: You know, the other point I wanted to make was that, you know, instead of promoting farm
[Guest 2]: loan waivers, we should be promoting crop insurance, which is also, I mean, if you look
[Guest 2]: at data, you know, over the last three years, I think crop insurance as a portion of, you
[Guest 2]: know, what has been farmed, the area that is under, which has been sown is around 26%.
[Guest 2]: Now, this is a very extremely low number, I mean, it's gone up from some 20 to 23% to
[Guest 2]: 26%.
[Guest 2]: Now, crop insurance is something which needs to be, you know, promoted, and farmers need
[Guest 2]: to be made aware of this concept, which is…
[Amit Varma]: And what are the barriers which stop it from happening?
[Guest 2]: I really don't know.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I guess it's a matter of communication, getting the communication right and, you know,
[Guest 2]: having the institutions to push it through.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, interestingly, like a few episodes ago, I spoke to Karthik Shashidhar on futures
[Amit Varma]: markets in agriculture, which either they are not allowed to trade in future markets
[Guest 2]: or all kinds of restrictions and the whole point was that is again another way of a farmer
[Guest 2]: being able to hedge his risk.
[Guest 2]: So in fact, if you look at the entire agri-derivative market in India, it is not for the farmer,
[Guest 2]: it is basically for the speculator and, you know, there are no farmers there.
[Guest 2]: I mean, any market needs its, you know, there, I mean, obviously, every market needs speculators
[Guest 2]: for it to operate efficiently, but you need the genuine guys as well.
[Guest 1]: So…
[Guest 1]: And here the farmers as a speculator are not participating.
[Guest 1]: The farmers are also speculators, except they are not, the real, the ones who should be
[Amit Varma]: participating are the ones who are not, you know, left out of the, out of this.
[Amit Varma]: So to get back to the subject of the episode, which is farm loan waivers, let me, let me
[Amit Varma]: just try to sum up some of the unseen effects, which you've discussed and tell me if I missed
[Amit Varma]: anything.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen effect number one is moral hazard.
[Amit Varma]: It basically incentivizes people to not pay back their loans, and it punishes those who
[Amit Varma]: pay.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, and because it continues every election cycle, it's just…
[Guest 1]: It destroys the credit discipline of the market.
[Amit Varma]: Number two, it is essentially a redistribution of wealth from the people at large to farmers.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a redistribution, not just directly, but in a number of different ways.
[Amit Varma]: So as you pointed out, Vivek, that it might well be the case now that our fiscal deficit
[Amit Varma]: goes up and the government, because it is funding these waivers, has to borrow more.
[Amit Varma]: But that also, down the line, affects the borrowing rate for private parties.
[Amit Varma]: And if they borrow at a higher rate, that cost is then passed on to consumers.
[Amit Varma]: It's just that it's not very clearly measurable.
[Amit Varma]: It's not measurable.
[Amit Varma]: It's an unseen effect.
[Amit Varma]: And at the margins, there might be businesses which don't open up or run at all because
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: So it has an impact all the way down the line.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, it's a negative sum game, you could say.
[Amit Varma]: These are the two main unseen effects.
[Amit Varma]: Any others that you can think of?
[Guest 2]: No.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I guess that sort of summarizes it.
[Amit Varma]: Which is pretty huge, actually.
[Amit Varma]: It's all-encompassing.
[Amit Varma]: One final question.
[Amit Varma]: So farm loan waivers have happened.
[Amit Varma]: Farmers have got waivers.
[Guest 2]: What's next?
[Guest 2]: Okay, so I recently wrote this piece on how, I mean, this was a very speculative piece
[Guest 2]: on how mudra loan waivers should be the next big thing.
[Amit Varma]: What is a mudra loan?
[Guest 2]: So mudra loan are these, you know, small loans, you know, given by banks.
[Guest 2]: And over the last two financial years, around 7.46 crore borrowers have been given loans
[Guest 2]: close to 3.2 lakh crore.
[Guest 2]: And I guess this year, the target is to sort of give loans of around 2.44 lakh crore.
[Guest 2]: So if you add by 2019, this should easily be, you know, 7 to 8 lakh crore.
[Guest 2]: So any politician, you know, willing to sort of, you know, stick his neck out and, you
[Guest 2]: know, gain popularity, he should essentially be sort of promising, you know, weaving off
[Guest 2]: of mudra loans.
[Guest 2]: Because it will, you know, benefit if, I mean, for a lack of a better word, a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: quote, unquote benefit.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Benefit.
[Guest 1]: That would be like committing a suicide for the economy.
[Guest 2]: But then, you know, if you're willing to weave off, I mean, let's say, you know, you may
[Guest 2]: not weave off the entire amount, you can weave off 25%, 50% or what.
[Amit Varma]: Once I really hope that if they haven't got this idea already, none of them are listening
[Amit Varma]: to this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: And in case they're listening in, I'd like to tell them that dudes, include me in this
[Amit Varma]: Ponzi scheme, you will have my vote for sure.
[Amit Varma]: If you include podcaster loan waivers, that's the next big idea.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, guys.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: That's all for today's episode, guys.
[Amit Varma]: Do head over to Pragati at ThinkPragati.com, the magazine I edit and search for an article
[Amit Varma]: written by Kumar and me called politics is equal to bribery.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Kumar on Twitter at Kumar Anand, and you can follow Vivek at call underscore
[Amit Varma]: Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: My Twitter handle is Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-E-R-M-A to check out archive episodes of the scene
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Just go to seen unseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can waste hours of your time.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen, check out another great show by IBM
[Amit Varma]: podcast made in India, hosted by my friend May Thomas, where every week she profiles
[Unknown]: up-and-coming independent Indians.